Created the blog post announcing Data Prepper 2.1.0. #1303 (#1314)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2023-02-07-Announcing-Data-Prepper-2.1.0.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Announcing Data Prepper 2.1.0"
authors:
- TODO - Krishna
- nsifmoh
- dlv
date: 2023-02-07 15:00:00 -0500
categories:
  - releases

> ---

Reviewer: Please add front matter. 

**Meta Keywords**: Data Prepper 2.1.0, Open Telemetry metrics, detect anomalies in the logs and traces, sampling and rate-limiting
**Meta description**: Data Prepper 2.1.0 improves performance and stability with enhancements such as generated metrics, anomaly detection, sampling and limiting, and more.

---
layout: post
title:  "Announcing Data Prepper 2.1.0"
authors:

> - kkondaka

Reviewer 2: authors files for first two authors are already created.

- nsifmoh
- dlv
date: 2023-02-07 15:00:00 -0500
categories:
  - releases
meta_keywords: Data Prepper 2.1.0, Open Telemetry metrics, OpenTelemetry logs, detect anomalies in logs and traces, sampling and rate-limiting
meta_description: Data Prepper 2.1.0 improves performance and stability with enhancements such as generated metrics, anomaly detection, sampling and limiting, and more.
---

Data Prepper 2.1.0 is now available for [download](https://opensearch.org/downloads.html#data-prepper)! This release

> provides a number of new features to Data Prepper.  Additionally, the maintainers have improved Data Prepper’s 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
provides several new features to Data Prepper.  Additionally, the maintainers have improved Data Prepper’s 
```

  processor:
    - aggregate:
        identification_keys: ["serviceName", "traceId"]
        action:
          histogram:
            key: "durationInNaos"
            record_minmax: true
            units: "nanoseconds"
            buckets: [1000000000, 1500000000, 2000000000]
        group_duration: "20s"
        aggregate_when: "/durationInNanos > 1000000000"
  sink:
      - opensearch
         hosts: ["https://opensearch:9200"]
         insecure: true
         username: "admin"
         password: "admin"
         index: trace-high-latency-metrics
```

## Anomaly detection

Data Prepper 2.1 introduces anomaly detection as an independent processor that can be placed anywhere in the pipeline to 
detect anomalies using AI/ML techniques. It supports only random cut forest algorithm to detect anomalies for now. 
Support for other AI/ML algorithms may be added in future. The processor can be configured to use any numerical (integer 
or floating point data type) field in the input events to detect anomalies.

Anomaly detection in Data Prepper allows for more scalable and efficient way to detect anomalies in the logs and traces 
because the ML algorithm is applied on the server side.

> For example, the anomaly detector processor placed after aggregate processor that generates histogram of trace latencies 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, the anomaly detector processor placed after aggregate processor that generates a histogram of trace latencies 
```

> (`durationInNanos`) could detect abnormally high latencies. The following anomaly detector processor configuration 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following is an example of such an anomaly detector processor configuration: 
```

> can be used for it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```

```
trace-metric-anomaly-detector-pipeline:
  source:
    pipeline:
      name: "trace-high-latency-metrics-pipeline"
  processor:
    - anomaly_detector:
        keys: ["max"]
        mode:
          random_cut_forest:
  sink:
    - opensearch
         hosts: ["https://opensearch:9200"]
         insecure: true
         username: "admin"
         password: "admin"
         index: high-latency-traces-with-anomalies
```

> ## Sampling and limiting

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Sampling and rate limiting
```

> Data Prepper 2.1 supports sampling and rate-limiting to limit the number of events that are sent to a Sink.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Data Prepper 2.1 supports sampling and rate-limiting to limit the number of events that are sent to a sink.
```

> Data Prepper 2.1 supports sampling and rate-limiting to limit the number of events that are sent to a Sink.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Data Prepper 2.1 supports sampling and rate limiting to limit the number of events that are sent to a sink.
```

> One possible use case for both these features can be used to reduce the load on the OpenSearch when storing normal 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One possible use case for both these features is to reduce the load on the OpenSearch when storing normal 
```

Reviewer 4: Could we say "ordinary" instead of "normal"?

(not very interesting) logs and metrics.

> Both these features are available as a configurable action in the aggregate processor. Simply choose the appropriate 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Both sampling and rate limiting are available as configurable actions in the aggregate processor. To use the features, choose the appropriate 
```

> action (sampling or rate limiting) and specify the sampling percent or events per second option as needed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
action (sampling or rate limiting) and specify the percentage of events or the number of events per second to send to OpenSearch.
```

Reviewer 4: The sample percent is for sampling, and the number of events is for rate limiting, correct? If this is the case, I would split the sentence into two parts, each describing one option.

Author: Correct, I will split this.

> For example, the following percent sampler configuration sends 60% of the events to OpenSearch

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, the following percent sampler configuration sends 60% of the events to OpenSearch:
```

```
trace-normal-pipeline:
  source:
    pipeline:
      name: "span-pipeline"
  processor:
    - aggregate:
        identification_keys: ["serviceName"]
        action:
          percent_sampler:
            percent: 60
        group_duration: "30s"
        aggregate_when: "/status_code != 2 and /durationInNanos <= 1000000000"
 sink:
    - opensearch
         hosts: ["https://opensearch:9200"]
         insecure: true
         username: "admin"
         password: "admin"
         index: sampled-traces
```

> Rate limiter action can be configured to limit the number of events by specifying the number of events per second and 

Reviewer 4: `A rate-limiting action`?

Author: This sounds reasonable to me.

> Rate limiter action can be configured to limit the number of events by specifying the number of events per second and 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can configure a rate-limiting action to limit the number of events by specifying the number of events per second. 
```

> optionally what to do when the number of events exceed the specified limit using the `when_exceeds` option. This 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Optionally, you can specify (to Data Prepper?) what to do when the number of events exceeds the specified limit using the `when_exceeds` option. The
```

> `when_exceeds` option can take either `block` or `drop` value and can either block until events are allowed or drop any 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`when_exceeds` option can take the following values:
- `block`: block (Data Prepper?) until events are allowed (this is the default value)
- `drop`: drop any excess events
```

> excess events. The `block` is useful if there is a temporary burst and the user do not want to lose any events in that 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Setting `when_exceeds` to `block` is useful if there is a temporary burst in the number of events and you don't want to lose any events.
```

case. The default value for this option is `block`.

> And the following rate limiter configuration send 10 events per second to the open search and using `drop` option.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And the following rate limiter configuration send 10 events per second to the open search and using `drop` option:
```

> And the following rate limiter configuration send 10 events per second to the open search and using `drop` option.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following rate-limiting configuration sends 10 events per second to OpenSearch and uses the `drop` option:
```

```
trace-normal-pipeline:
  source:
    pipeline:
      name: "span-pipeline"
  processor:
    - aggregate:
        identification_keys: ["serviceName"]
        action:
          rate_limiter:
            events_per_second: 10
            when_exceeds: "drop"
        group_duration: "30s"
        aggregate_when: "/status_code != 2 and /durationInNanos <= 1000000000"
 sink:
    - opensearch
         hosts: ["https://opensearch:9200"]
         insecure: true
         username: "admin"
         password: "admin"
         index: sampled-traces
```

> ## OTel logs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Otel logs
```

Author: This is an abbreviation for OpenTelemetry which is a proper noun.

> OpenTelemetry, also known as OTel for short,

https://opentelemetry.io/docs/

Reviewer 3: In that case, this should read as: "OpenTelemetry (OTel) logs".

Reviewer 4: Since we're not using the abbreviation in the section body, does it make sense to leave it in the spelled-out form? "OpenTelemetry logs"?

One of Data Prepper’s goals is supporting open standards. Data Prepper now supports the [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io)
log format. Previously, Data Prepper supported log data through the 
[HTTP source plugin](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/data-prepper/configuration/sources/http-source/), 

> which works well with tools such as [FluentBit](https://fluentbit.io). Some users would like to deploy the 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
which works well with tools such as [FluentBit](https://fluentbit.io). If you would like to deploy the 
```

> which works well with tools such as [FluentBit](https://fluentbit.io). Some users would like to deploy the 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
, which works well with tools such as [FluentBit](https://fluentbit.io). Some users would like to deploy the 
```

> [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/) on their applications 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[OpenTelemetry Collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/) on your applications 
```

> and not require any other sidecars. Those users can now start to send logs to Data Prepper and then to OpenSearch.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and not require any other sidecars, you can now send logs to Data Prepper, which will route them to OpenSearch.
```

## OpenSearch sink improvements

Running Data Prepper as an ingestion pipeline in front of OpenSearch is an important capability for Data Prepper. This 

> release now adds hew enhancements to Data Prepper’s OpenSearch sink to make it even more useful with OpenSearch.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
release adds hew enhancements to Data Prepper’s OpenSearch sink to make it even more useful with OpenSearch.
```

> Data Prepper now supports routing traces and logs to different indices dynamically. Pipeline authors can define an 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Data Prepper now supports routing traces and logs to different indexes dynamically. Pipeline authors can define an 
```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Data Prepper now supports routing traces and logs to different indexes dynamically. To achieve this, you can define an 
```

index name using a format string which can include properties from different events. With this capability, Data Prepper 

> can support an arbitrary number of indices using a single sink. For example, if you have logs with different 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
can support an arbitrary number of indexes using a single sink. For example, if you have logs with different 
```

> application identifiers, you could route events to an index specifically for each application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
application identifiers, you can route events to an index specifically for each application.
```

> Data Prepper also now allows routing documents to specific OpenSearch shards by use of the existing `routing` parameter 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Data Prepper now also allows routing documents to specific OpenSearch shards using the existing `routing` parameter 
```

in OpenSearch. The new `routing_field` property on the OpenSearch sink will use properties from events to specify how to 

> route within OpenSearch. Most users will prefer to allow OpenSearch to generate document ids and choose the shard 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
route within OpenSearch. Most users will prefer to allow OpenSearch to generate document IDs and choose the shard 
```

> route within OpenSearch. Most users will prefer to allow OpenSearch to generate document ids and choose the shard 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
route them within OpenSearch. Most users prefer allowing OpenSearch to generate document IDs and choose the shard 
```

> from that. But, in some cases users need to specify these values and now Data Prepper offers users that option.

Reviewer 4: What exactly is meant by "choose the shard from that"? Could we add a noun here or explain a bit more?
```suggestion
from that. However, Data Prepper now allows you to specify these values explicitly.
```

> Going hand-in-hand with the routing field, Data Prepper now allows pipeline authors to specify a complex field to 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Going hand-in-hand with the routing field, Data Prepper now lets you specify a complex field to 
```

> use when specifying a document Id. Previously, a pipeline author would need to copy a value to a field in the root of 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
use when specifying a document ID. Previously, a pipeline author would need to copy a value to a field in the root of 
```

> use when specifying a document Id. Previously, a pipeline author would need to copy a value to a field in the root of 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
use when specifying a document ID. Previously you could only copy a value to a field in the root of 
```

> the event to use it as a document Id.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the event to use it as a document ID.
```

## Type conversion

Data Prepper now supports a new 
[convert entry](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/tree/main/data-prepper-plugins/mutate-event-processors#convertentryprocessor) 
processor as part of 
[mutate processors](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/tree/main/data-prepper-plugins/mutate-event-processors#mutate-event-processors) 

> to convert value from one type to another. This can be particularly useful in conditional expressions when using conditional routing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
to convert a value from one type to another. This can be particularly useful in conditional expressions when using conditional routing.
```

> For example, in the following pipeline using this processor would allow a user to convert value of `status` key to `integer`. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, using the following processor in a pipeline lets you convert the value of `status` key to `integer`:
```

```
...
processor:
  - convert_entry_type:
      key: "status"
      type: "integer"
...
```

## Other improvements

> In addition to the new features already described, Data Prepper 2.1.0 has a few other improvements. We want to highlight a few of them.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In addition to the new features already described, Data Prepper 2.1.0 has several other important improvements:
```

> * Data Prepper pipelines with OpenSearch sink now waits for OpenSearch to start during pipeline initialization if the sink is not available instead of failing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Data Prepper pipelines with OpenSearch sinks now wait for OpenSearch to start during pipeline initialization if the sink is not available instead of failing.
```

> * OpenSearch sink now allows users to load index mapping and ISM template files from S3 bucket. Pipeline authors can configure it by providing S3 URI’s in existing configuration option to load them.

Reviewer 4: So, one S3 bucket can have many URIs? Also, what is the existing configuration option: could we be more specific?
```suggestion
* OpenSearch sink now allows you to load index mapping and ISM template files from an S3 bucket. You can configure the S3 bucket by providing its URIs in existing configuration option to load them.
```

> * Data Prepper expressions now support `null` value keyword in conditions with equality operators.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Data Prepper expressions now support the `null` value keyword in conditions with equality operators.
```

> * To help with pipeline stability, Data Prepper now supports a circuit breaker on Java heap usage. This will cause the sources to stop accepting new data that could possibly cause the process to crash.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* To help with pipeline stability, Data Prepper now supports a circuit breaker on Java heap usage. The circuit breaker will cause the sources to stop accepting new data that could possibly cause the process to crash.
```

* The documentation team has been updating the [Data Prepper documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/data-prepper/index/) by migrating many of the details from the GitHub repository into the primary documentation. 

See the [release notes](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/releases/tag/2.1.0) for a full list of changes.

## Get started

> You can download Data Prepper or install a Docker container from the OpenSearch downloads page. The maintainers encourage 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can [download](https://opensearch.org/downloads.html) Data Prepper or install a Docker container from the OpenSearch downloads page. The maintainers encourage 
```

> all users to update to Data Prepper 2.1.0 to gain the improved stability, administration options, and feature set.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
all users to update to Data Prepper 2.1.0 to gain improved stability, additional administration options, and new features.
```

> Work is already started on Data Prepper 2.2. Please see the [roadmap](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/projects/1)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We already started working on Data Prepper 2.2. See the [roadmap](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/projects/1)
```

> to learn about what is upcoming.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
to learn more.
```

came from community contributions in the form of GitHub issues and pull requests.

## Generated metrics

By creating metrics for logs and traces that pass through Data Prepper, the performance and scalability of OpenSearch 
(data store, search engine, and visualization) can be significantly enhanced. The ability to generate metrics enables the 
summarization of events over a specific time period, making it easier to visualize and set alerts, as opposed to utilizing 
raw data for visualization and alerting.

Data Prepper 2.1 supports generating OpenTelemetry-format metrics from all incoming events. The Data Prepper aggregate 
processor has two new actions that support the generation of metrics for logs and traces:

- The `histogram` action generates a histogram of the data field being aggregated. The histogram data includes total 
count, min, max, and sum, in addition to the histogram buckets and bucket-level counts.

- The `count` action generates a count of the data being aggregated.

You can combine both of these actions with the aggregate processor’s conditional aggregation option in order to generate more meaningful metrics.

> For example, you can obtain the number of traces with error (`status_code` equal to 2) using the `count` aggregate action along 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For example, you can obtain the number of traces with an error (`status_code` equal to 2) using the `count` aggregate action along 
```

or floating-point data type) field in the input events to detect anomalies.

Anomaly detection in Data Prepper provides a more scalable and efficient way to detect anomalies in logs and traces 
because the ML algorithm is applied on the server side.

For example, consider an aggregate processor that generates a histogram of trace latencies (`durationInNanos`). If you place an anomaly detector processor after the aggregate processor, it can identify abnormally high latencies. 
The following is an example of such a configuration:

```
trace-metric-anomaly-detector-pipeline:
  source:
    pipeline:
      name: "trace-high-latency-metrics-pipeline"
  processor:
    - anomaly_detector:
        keys: ["max"]
        mode:
          random_cut_forest:
  sink:
    - opensearch
         hosts: ["https://opensearch:9200"]
         insecure: true
         username: "admin"
         password: "admin"
         index: high-latency-traces-with-anomalies
```

## Sampling and rate limiting

Data Prepper 2.1 supports sampling and rate limiting to limit the number of events that are sent to a sink.

> These features can be used to reduce the load on the OpenSearch cluster when storing uninteresting logs and metrics.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
These features can be used to reduce the load on the OpenSearch cluster when storing ordinary logs and metrics.
```

Author: @natebower , Is there a specific reason you recommended going back to "ordinary" here? It does seem that "uninteresting" is a more apt word because these are logs that somebody would not be very interested in.

Reviewer 5: @dlvenable I think "ordinary" is ok as long as we qualify what we're talking about, which I believe you did in the sentence that follows this one. "Uninteresting" is subjective and a bit awkward in this context.

> For example, you can limit the number of success HTTP logs or repetitive requests such as from a health check. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For example, you can limit the number of success HTTP logs or repetitive requests, such as from a health check. 
```

---
layout: post
title:  "Announcing Data Prepper 2.1.0"
authors:
- kkondaka
- nsifmoh
- dlv
date: 2023-02-07 15:00:00 -0500
categories:
  - releases

> meta_keywords: Data Prepper 2.1.0, Open Telemetry metrics, OpenTelemetry logs, detect anomalies in logs and traces, sampling and rate-limiting

Reviewer: Please update the post date for the blog to March 2, 2023.

> meta_keywords: Data Prepper 2.1.0, Open Telemetry metrics, OpenTelemetry logs, detect anomalies in logs and traces, sampling and rate-limiting

Author: @natebower , I made this change, but I also see that the original comment for this said not to edit:

https://github.com/opensearch-project/project-website/pull/1314#discussion_r1095172811

Should I change or not?

> meta_keywords: Data Prepper 2.1.0, Open Telemetry metrics, OpenTelemetry logs, detect anomalies in logs and traces, sampling and rate-limiting

Reviewer: @dlvenable you can make the changes. Technically, browsers just check that the words are strung together and do not care about the spacing, punctuation, or capitalization.

> meta_keywords: Data Prepper 2.1.0, Open Telemetry metrics, OpenTelemetry logs, detect anomalies in logs and traces, sampling and rate-limiting

Reviewer 5: @dlvenable Thanks! @pajuric I'll definitely be editing these descriptions if I see errors in them.

stability and performance. Many of the new features 
came from community contributions in the form of GitHub issues and pull requests.

## Generated metrics

By creating metrics for logs and traces that pass through the Data Prepper, the performance and scalability of OpenSearch 
(data store, search engine, and visualization) can be significantly enhanced. The ability to generate metrics enables the 
summarization of events over a specific time period, making it easier to visualize and set alerts, as opposed to utilizing 
raw data for visualization and alerting.

Data Prepper 2.1 supports generating Open Telemetry format metrics from all incoming events. The Data Prepper aggregate 
processor has two new actions to support the generation of metrics for logs and traces:

- The `histogram` action generates a histogram of the data field being aggregated. The histogram data includes total 
count, min, max, sum in addition to the histogram buckets and bucket-level counts.

- The `count` action generates a count of the data being aggregated.

You can combine both of these actions with aggregate processor’s conditional aggregation option to generate more meaningful metrics.

> For example, you can obtain the number of traces with error (`status_code` equal to 2) using the `count` aggregate action along 

Author: @kkondaka , Can you help with rewording this part?

> For example, you can obtain the number of traces with error (`status_code` equal to 2) using the `count` aggregate action along 

Reviewer 2: @natebower, what would be the correct way of writing this? I meant that the traces with status code 2 are considered error. Something like this is more clear? - "the number of traces with error, ie with `status_code` equals to 2. 
Basically traces have a field called `status_code` and if the `status_code` value is 2, it is considered as error. That's what I meant by "traces with error". Appreciate your feedback on how to change the wording to reflect the correct meaning.

> For example, you can obtain the number of traces with error (`status_code` equal to 2) using the `count` aggregate action along 

Reviewer 5: It looks like it just needed an article (an).

> For example, you can obtain the number of traces with error (`status_code` equal to 2) using the `count` aggregate action along 

Reviewer 2: @natebower do you mean I just put "an" before "error" - like - " the number of trace with an error (`status_code` equal to 2) using the `count` aggregate action..."

> For example, you can obtain the number of traces with error (`status_code` equal to 2) using the `count` aggregate action along 

Reviewer 5: @kkondaka Correct, I've already made the change in a suggestion during my last review :-)

> For example, you can obtain the number of traces with error (`status_code` equal to 2) using the `count` aggregate action along 

Reviewer 2: @natebower, great! Thanks!

Anomaly detection in Data Prepper allows for a more scalable and efficient way to detect anomalies in the logs and traces 
because the ML algorithm is applied on the server side.

For example, consider an aggregate processor that generates a histogram of trace latencies (`durationInNanos`). If you place an anomaly detector processor after the aggregate processor, it could identify abnormally high latencies. 
The following is an example of such an anomaly detector processor configuration:

```
trace-metric-anomaly-detector-pipeline:
  source:
    pipeline:
      name: "trace-high-latency-metrics-pipeline"
  processor:
    - anomaly_detector:
        keys: ["max"]
        mode:
          random_cut_forest:
  sink:
    - opensearch
         hosts: ["https://opensearch:9200"]
         insecure: true
         username: "admin"
         password: "admin"
         index: high-latency-traces-with-anomalies
```

## Sampling and rate limiting

Data Prepper 2.1 supports sampling and rate-limiting to limit the number of events that are sent to a sink.

One possible use case for both these features is to reduce the load on the OpenSearch when storing ordinary 

> (not very interesting) logs and metrics.

Author: I gave it another shot. Please see the change.

Both sampling and rate limiting are available as configurable actions in the aggregate processor.

> To use the features, choose the appropriate action (sampling or rate limiting).

Author: I think that is a good idea.

log format. Previously, Data Prepper supported log data through the 
[HTTP source plugin](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/data-prepper/configuration/sources/http-source/), 
which works well with tools such as [FluentBit](https://fluentbit.io). If you would like to deploy the 
[OpenTelemetry Collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/) on your applications 
and not require any other sidecars, you can now send logs to Data Prepper, which will route them to OpenSearch.

## OpenSearch sink improvements

Running Data Prepper as an ingestion pipeline in front of OpenSearch is an important capability for Data Prepper. This 
release adds hew enhancements to Data Prepper’s OpenSearch sink to make it even more useful with OpenSearch.

Data Prepper now supports routing traces and logs to different indexes dynamically. To achieve this, you can define an 
index name using a format string which can include properties from different events. With this capability, Data Prepper 
can support an arbitrary number of indexes using a single sink. For example, if you have logs with different 

> application identifiers, you can route events to an index specifically for each application.

Author: I like your suggestion. Would "unique" help here?

> to an index unique to each application

> application identifiers, you can route events to an index specifically for each application.

Reviewer 5: Yes, that would work :-)

use when specifying a document ID. Previously, you could only copy a value to a field in the root of 
the event to use it as a document ID.

## Type conversion

Data Prepper now supports a new 
[convert entry](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/tree/main/data-prepper-plugins/mutate-event-processors#convertentryprocessor) 
processor as part of 
[mutate processors](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/tree/main/data-prepper-plugins/mutate-event-processors#mutate-event-processors) 
to convert a value from one type to another. This can be particularly useful in conditional expressions when using conditional routing.

For example, using the following processor in a pipeline lets you convert the value of `status` key to `integer`: 

```
...
processor:
  - convert_entry_type:
      key: "status"
      type: "integer"
...
```

## Other improvements

In addition to the new features already described, Data Prepper 2.1.0 has several other important improvements:

* Data Prepper pipelines with OpenSearch sinks now wait for OpenSearch to start during pipeline initialization if the sink is not available instead of failing.

> *  OpenSearch sink now allows you to load index mapping and ISM template files from an S3 bucket. You can configure the S3 object by providing its S3 URI in existing configuration option to load them.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
*  OpenSearch sinks now allow you to load index mapping and Index State Management (ISM) template files from an Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3) bucket. You can configure the S3 object by providing its S3 URI in existing configuration option to load them.
```

Reviewer 5: The last sentence is a bit confusingly written, is missing articles, and has an unclear subject. Please revise for simplicity/clarity.

Author: I'll just remove it. I don't think we need it in the release blog post.

* Data Prepper expressions now support the `null` value keyword in conditions with equality operators.

> * To help with pipeline stability, Data Prepper now supports a circuit breaker on Java heap usage. The circuit breaker will cause the sources to stop accepting new data that could possibly cause the process to crash.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* To help with pipeline stability, Data Prepper now provides a circuit breaker on Java heap usage. The circuit breaker will cause the sources to stop accepting new data that could possibly cause the process to crash.
```

> * The documentation team has been updating the [Data Prepper documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/data-prepper/index/) by migrating many of the details from the GitHub repository into the primary documentation. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* The Documentation team has been updating the [Data Prepper documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/data-prepper/index/) by migrating many of the details from the GitHub repository to the primary documentation. 
```

Reviewer 5: Is this sentence necessary? We should probably avoid referring to the Documentation team as a discrete entity, given that this is open source, and I'm not sure how much value this sentence adds.

Author: We can remove it. I was calling it out because the documentation is much better than it used to be.

See the [release notes](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/releases/tag/2.1.0) for a full list of changes.

> ## Get started

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Getting started
```

> You can [download](https://opensearch.org/downloads.html) Data Prepper or install a Docker container from the OpenSearch downloads page. The maintainers encourage 

Author: I'm not sure that "on" is the right preposition here. The verbs here are "download" and "install." Users are installing on their local machine from OpenSearch.

> You can [download](https://opensearch.org/downloads.html) Data Prepper or install a Docker container from the OpenSearch downloads page. The maintainers encourage 

Reviewer 5: Ah ok, I see the distinction. In that case, you're good with "from".

> all users to update to Data Prepper 2.1.0 to gain the improved stability, additional administration options, and new features.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
all users to update to Data Prepper 2.1.0 in order to gain the improved stability, additional administrative options, and new features.
```
